add blog posts about js backend debugging, stacks and weak refs (#37)
input-output-hk/engineering: blog/2023-02-28-js-backend-stacks.md

---
slug: 2023-02-28-stacks-in-the-js-backend
title: Stacks in the JavaScript Backend
date: Febuary 28, 2023
authors: [ luite ]
tags: [ghc, javascript, threads, rts ]
---

## Introduction

I recently gave a short presentation on the topic of stacks in the JavaScript backend to the GHC team at IOG. This blog post is a summary of the content.

## Haskell Lightweight Stacks

> In the context of a program produced by the GHC JavaScript backend, two different types of stack exist: The JavaScript call stack and Haskell lightweigt thread stacks. This blog post deals with the latter.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the context of a program produced by the GHC JavaScript backend, two different types of stack exist: The JavaScript call stack and Haskell lightweight thread stacks. In this post we'll ignore the JavaScript call stack and instead focus our attention on the Haskell lightweight thread stacks.
```

In general its an anti-pattern to say `former...latter` because it creates an indirection in the readers head that they must keep track of. This increases the cognitive load of the writing and can make it harder to parse. So its better to be direct if possible.

> Each Haskell thread has a thread state object, `t` of type `h$Thread`. This object stores the state of a lightweight thread, for example whether the thread is finished or whether asynchronous exceptions are ignored. It also contains `t.stack`, an array representing the stack and `t.sp`, a number pointing to the current top of the stack.

Reviewer: imagine ordering some food from a cafe. Its clearer to the barista if you start at a high level and then refine the information: I'm ordering 3 things: 2 drinks and a pastry. The drinks are both lattes, same size, but one with oat milk the other regular....and so on. The point is to first give a high level view: `There are 3 things` then refine that view over time: `2 drinks and a pastry` and `The drinks are both ...`. The other key point here is to order the things you've introduced and to stick to that order: The information for the drinks always comes before the information for the pastry because that order is how these things were introduced: `2 drinks and a pastry`.

So how about:

```suggestion
Each Haskell thread has a thread state object, `t` of type `h$Thread`. This object has three fields: the state, `t.status`; a stack, `t.stack`; and a stack pointer, `t.sp`. `t.status` tracks the state of the object, for example, it determines whether the thread is finished or is ignoring asynchronous exceptions. `t.stack` is an javascript array representing the stack of the thread, and  `t.sp` is a number that tracks the top of `t.stack`.
```

`t.stack` grows dynamically as needed, and is occasionally shrunk to reclaim memory.

> When a thread is created, the stack is initialized with some values:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When a thread is created, the stack is initialized with some key values:
```

These aren't just any values, they are particular and key values to the correctness of the implementation.

```javascript
/** @constructor */
function h$Thread() {
    this.tid = ++h$threadIdN;
    this.status = THREAD_RUNNING;
    this.stack = [h$done
                 , 0
                 , h$baseZCGHCziConcziSynczireportError
                 , h$catch_e
                 ];
    this.sp = 3;
    this.mask = 0;                // async exceptions masked (0 unmasked, 1: uninterruptible, 2: interruptible)
    this.interruptible = false;   // currently in an interruptible operation
    ...
}
```

> The initial stack contains two stack frames. The top three slots contain a `catch` frame with the `h$catch_e` header, the `h$baseZCGHCziConcziSynczireportError` exception handler and `0`, for the mask state. The last slot of the stack is for `h$done` frame, which only has a header and no payload.

Reviewer: how could I tell from looking at the example that the stack contains two frames? I don't think I can, so maybe say that. Other than that this is good because you go from high level and then refine like I suggested above.

## Scheduling a Thread

Typical Haskell code does a lot of manipulation of values on the stack. It would be quite inefficient to do all of this through the thread state object of the current thread, `h$currentThread`. That's why the stack `h$stack` and the "stack pointer" `h$sp` to the top of the stack are global variables that are initialized when a thread is scheduled:

```javascript
// scheduling a thread t
h$currentThread = t;
h$stack = t.stack;

> h$sp = t.sp;

Reviewer: explain the examples:

Perhaps like this:
> We see that `h$currentThread` is set to the thread object `t` making `t` now the thread that is running from the view of the scheduler. Next we mutate the global variable tracking the stack to the thread stack: `h$stack = t.stack` and similarly set the global stack pointer to the thread stack pointer in the next line. So scheduling a stack is really a matter of assigning the proper thread information to the global variables that are used by the scheduler.

```

> When a thread is suspended, the values are saved back to the thread state object:

Reviewer: this is funny but I was reading through the history of chez scheme: https://legacy.cs.indiana.edu/~dyb/pubs/hocs.pdf

and this is exactly one of the ways they implemented continuations in an early version of chez (see Section 3, paragraph 3 beginning with `The solution for continuations seemed obvious`)

```javascript
// suspending a thread t
t.stack = h$stack;
t.sp = h$sp;

> h$currentThread = null;

Reviewer: explain this example

```

> ## Stack Frames

Reviewer: aha! Perhaps link or reference this earlier at the place I made a comment about stack frames

Each stack frame starts with a header, which is a JavaScript function. The header is followed by zero or more slots of payload, which can be arbitrary JavaScript values.

> The header serves as the "return point": When some code is done reducing some value to weak-head normal form it returns this value to the next stack frame by storing it in `h$r1` (or more for large values or unboxed tuples), popping its own stack frame and calling the header of the next stack frame at `h$stack[h$sp]`

Reviewer: explain that `h$r1` is a register.

  h$sp -= 3;
  return h$stack[h$sp];
};
```

An exception is thrown by the `h$throw` function, which unwinds the stack. Its implementation in simplified form looks like this:

```javascript
function h$throw(e, async) {
  ...
  while(h$sp > 0) {
    f = h$stack[h$sp];
    ...
    if(f === h$catch_e) break;
    if(f === h$atomically_e) { ... }
    if(f === h$catchStm_e && !async) break;
    if(f === h$upd_frame) { /* handle black hole */ }
    h$sp -= h$stackFrameSize(f, sp);
  }
  if(h$sp > 0) {
    var maskStatus = h$stack[h$p - 2];
    var handler = h$stack[h$sp - 1];
    ...
  }
  /* jump to handler */
}
```

`h$throw` keeps removing stack frames from the stack until some frame of interest is found. Eventually it transfers control to an exception handler or it reports an error if no exception handling frame could be found. `h$throw` uses the `h$stackFrameSize` helper function do determine the size of each frame.

```javascript
function h$stackFrameSize(f) {
  if(f === h$ap_gen) {
    return (h$stack[h$sp - 1] >> 8) + 2;
  } else {
    var tag = f.size;
    if(tag < 0) {
      return h$stack[h$sp-1];
    } else {
      return (tag & 0xff) + 1;
    }
  }
  ```

## Conclusion

> We have that stacks in the JavaScript backend are represented by JavaScript arrays. The contents on the stack consists of stack frames with a header and a payload. The header of each stack frame contains some metadata so that code for exception can traverse the stack and transfer control to an exception handler.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
We have seen that stacks of Haskell lightweight threads are represented by JavaScript arrays with the JavaScript backend. The contents on the stack consists of stack frames with a header and a payload. The header of each stack frame contains some metadata so that code for exception can traverse the stack and transfer control to an exception handler.
```
